docs: provide content for the `parser` document (#861)
asyncapi/generator: docs/parser.md

weight: 60
---

## Parser

The AsyncAPI Parser is a package used to parse and validate the [AsyncAPI documents](asyncapi-document.md) in your Node.js or browser application. These documents can be either in YAML or JSON format.

The Parser validates these documents using dedicated schema-supported plugins. 

Supported schemas:

- AsyncAPI schema (no plugin needed)
- OpenAPI schema
- JSON schema
- Avro schema
- RAML data-type schema

The Parser allows the template developer to easily access schemas provided in the above supported formats. This is because the JavaScript parser converts all of them into JSON schema.

> If the document is valid, the Parser returns an `AsyncAPIDocument` instance with a set of helper functions that enable easier access to the contents of the AsyncAPI document. The parser provides dereferenced output. During the dereference process, the AsyncAPI parser substitutes a reference with a full definition. The dereferenced output is always in JSON format. The parser provides a message listing all errors if a document is invalid. The original asyncAPI document is part of the [Template Context](template-context.md) as the generator also passes the original asyncAPI document to the template context.	

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the document is valid, the Parser returns an `AsyncAPIDocument` instance with a set of helper functions that enable easier access to the contents of the AsyncAPI document. The parser provides dereferenced output. During the dereference process, the AsyncAPI parser substitutes a reference with a full definition. The dereferenced output is always in JSON format. The parser provides a message listing all errors if a document is invalid. The original AsyncAPI document is part of the [Template Context](template-context.md) as the generator also passes the original AsyncAPI document to the template context.	
```

The following AsyncAPI document example has two channels: `channelOne` and `channelTwo`. Each channel has one operation and a single message:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.5.0'
info:
  title: Demo API
  version: '1.0.0'
channels:

>   name/channelOne:

Reviewer: In the paragraph above, you say there are two channels: `channelOne` and `channelTwo`. So let's remove `name/` from the name of the channel or it can cause confusion:

```suggestion
  channelOne:
```

    publish:
      summary: This is the first sample channel
      operationId: onMessage
      message:
        name: FirstMessage
        payload:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Id of the channel
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.

>   name/channelTwo:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  channelTwo:
```

weight: 90
---

## Parser

> AsyncAPI Parser is a package used to parse and validate the AsyncAPI documents in your Node.js or browser application. These documents can be either in–YAML or JSON format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AsyncAPI Parser is a package used to parse and validate the AsyncAPI documents in your Node.js or browser application. These documents can be either in YAML or JSON format.
```

Parser validates these documents using dedicated schema-supported plugins. These supported schemas are:

> - AsyncAPI schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- AsyncAPI schema (no plugin needed)
```

- OpenAPI schema
- JSON schema
- Avro schema

> - RAML data-type schema(schema parser for RAML data types)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- RAML data-type schema
```

> > Note: If you use the parser as a package, you can also register external schemas. For example, you can also write your own schema.

Reviewer 2: not needed in context of generator. Especially that there is no mechanism in place that would allow you to register some other parsers that are in place already

> > Note: If you use the parser as a package, you can also register external schemas. For example, you can also write your own schema.

Reviewer: It would be great to get a better example here.

Reviewer 3: What would be a better example?

Reviewer: An actual code example of how you use these plugins with the parser. See https://github.com/asyncapi/avro-schema-parser for an example.

Reviewer: At the very least I'd link to an example on the Parser docs. Otherwise, this comment here seems unhelpful to me.

Author: hey @fmvilas @derberg I have added a demo json example which modifies the streetlight one. Though im not really sure if its correct🤔 Can you check it out

If the document is valid, Parser returns `AsyncAPIDocument` instance with a set of helper functions that enable easier access to contents of AsyncAPI document. The parser provides dereferenced output. During the dereference process the AsyncAPI parser substitutes a reference with a full definition. The dereferenced output is always in the .json format. If a document is invalid, the parser provides a message listing all errors. 

> > document under construction

Reviewer 2: you plan to add something more?

Author: yes i do!

Author: sorry for the delay

weight: 90
---

## Parser

AsyncAPI Parser is a package used to parse and validate the AsyncAPI documents in your Node.js or browser application. These documents can be either in YAML or JSON format.

Parser validates these documents using dedicated schema-supported plugins. These supported schemas are:

- AsyncAPI schema (no plugin needed)
- OpenAPI schema
- JSON schema
- Avro schema
- RAML data-type schema

Parser allows the template developer to also easily access schemas provided in all of the above supported formats. This is because the JavaScript parser converts all of them into JSON schema.

> If the document is valid, Parser returns `AsyncAPIDocument` instance with a set of helper functions that enable easier access to contents of AsyncAPI document. The parser provides dereferenced output. During the dereference process the AsyncAPI parser substitutes a reference with a full definition. The dereferenced output is always in the .json format. If a document is invalid, the parser provides a message listing all errors. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the document is valid, Parser returns `AsyncAPIDocument` instance with a set of helper functions that enable easier access to contents of AsyncAPI document. The parser provides dereferenced output. During the dereference process the AsyncAPI parser substitutes a reference with a full definition. The dereferenced output is always in the JSON format. If a document is invalid, the parser provides a message listing all errors. 
```

For example, the following asyncapi document has two channels–`channelOne` and `channelTwo`. Each channel has one operation and a single message:

> ```js
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

> asyncapi: '2.5.0'
> info:
>   title: Demo API
>   version: '1.0.0'
> channels:
>   name/channelOne:
>     publish:
>       summary: This is the first sample channel
>       operationId: onMessage
>       message:
>         name: FirstMessage
>             id:
>               type: integer
>               minimum: 0
>               description: Id of the channel
>             sentAt:
>               type: string
>               format: date-time
>               description: Date and time when the message was sent.
>   name/channelTwo:
>     publish:
>       summary: This is the second sample channel
>       operationId: messageRead
>       message:
>         name: SecondMessage
>             id:
>               type: integer
>               minimum: 0
>               description: Id of the channel
>             sentAt:
>               type: string
>               format: date-time
>               description: Date and time when the message was sent.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
asyncapi: '2.5.0'
info:
  title: Demo API
  version: '1.0.0'
channels:
  name/channelOne:
    publish:
      summary: This is the first sample channel
      operationId: onMessage
      message:
        name: FirstMessage
        payload:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Id of the channel
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.
  name/channelTwo:
    publish:
      summary: This is the second sample channel
      operationId: messageRead
      message:
        name: SecondMessage
        payload:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Id of the channel
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.
```

Reviewer: It was missing the `payload` key but other than that it looks good.

A good way to check if your AsyncAPI files are valid is to head to https://studio.asyncapi.com and paste it there. It will tell you where the errors are (if any).

weight: 90
---

## Parser

> AsyncAPI Parser is a package used to parse and validate the [AsyncAPI documents](asyncapi-document.md) in your Node.js or browser application. These documents can be either in YAML or JSON format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The AsyncAPI Parser is a package used to parse and validate the [AsyncAPI documents](asyncapi-document.md) in your Node.js or browser application. These documents can be either in YAML or JSON format.
```

> Parser validates these documents using dedicated schema-supported plugins. These supported schemas are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Parser validates these documents using dedicated schema-supported plugins. 

Supported schemas:
```

- AsyncAPI schema (no plugin needed)
- OpenAPI schema
- JSON schema
- Avro schema
- RAML data-type schema

> Parser allows the template developer to also easily access schemas provided in all of the above supported formats. This is because the JavaScript parser converts all of them into JSON schema.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Parser allows the template developer to easily access schemas provided in the above supported formats. This is because the JavaScript parser converts all of them into JSON schema.
```

> If the document is valid, Parser returns `AsyncAPIDocument` instance with a set of helper functions that enable easier access to contents of AsyncAPI document. The parser provides dereferenced output. During the dereference process the AsyncAPI parser substitutes a reference with a full definition. The dereferenced output is always in the JSON format. If a document is invalid, the parser provides a message listing all errors. The original asyncAPI document is part of the [Template Context](template-context.md) as generator passes the original asyncAPI document to the template context as well.	

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the document is valid, the Parser returns an `AsyncAPIDocument` instance with a set of helper functions that enable easier access to the contents of the AsyncAPI document. The parser provides dereferenced output. During the dereference process, the AsyncAPI parser substitutes a reference with a full definition. The dereferenced output is always in JSON format. The parser provides a message listing all errors if a document is invalid. The original asyncAPI document is part of the [Template Context](template-context.md) as the generator also passes the original asyncAPI document to the template context.	
```

> For example, the following asyncapi document has two channels–`channelOne` and `channelTwo`. Each channel has one operation and a single message:

Reviewer 3: The following AsyncAPI document example has two channels:`channelOne` and `channelTwo`. Each channel has one operation and a single message:
```

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.5.0'
info:
  title: Demo API
  version: '1.0.0'
channels:
  name/channelOne:
    publish:
      summary: This is the first sample channel
      operationId: onMessage
      message:
        name: FirstMessage
        payload:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Id of the channel
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.
  name/channelTwo:
    publish:
      summary: This is the second sample channel
      operationId: messageRead
      message:
        name: SecondMessage
        payload:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Id of the channel
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.
```

> We can use helper functions provided by parser to operate on the above JSON file. For example, we can use the helper method `asyncAPIDocument.channelNames()` which returns an array of all channel names currently present in the asyncAPI document. Another example where you can use a helper function is to list out messages present in your JSON file. Instead of fetching a single message one at a time, you can use the function `asyncAPIDocument.allMessages()` that returns the map of all messages present in your asyncAPI document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can use helper functions provided by the Parser to operate on the above JSON file. For example, we can use the helper method `asyncAPIDocument.channelNames()`, which returns an array of all channel names currently present in the AsyncAPI document. Another example where you can use a helper function is to list out messages present in your JSON file. Instead of fetching a single message one at a time, you can use the function `asyncAPIDocument.allMessages()` that returns the map of all messages in your AsyncAPI document.
```

```js
  const channelNames = asyncAPIDocument.channelNames();
  const messages = asyncAPIDocument.allMessages();
```

> > Parser gives you access to a number of these [helper functions](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/blob/master/API.md) that you can implement to access contents of your asyncAPI document. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The Parser gives you access to a number of these [helper functions](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/blob/master/API.md) that you can implement to access the contents of your AsyncAPI document. 
```

> ## AsyncAPI document validation process

Reviewer 2: Please adjust the text in steps to match the diagram. These should describe diagram, and use naming that is the same in the diagram, so the person reading can map text to the diagram. I hope that makes sense 😅 

also fix numbering. I recommend using `1.` in all steps, parsers properly render it into ordered numbers

1. **AsyncAPI document** is fed as an input to the Generator.

> 1. Generator sends asyncAPI document to the parser as **asyncapiString**. It is the stringified version of the original asyncAPI document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Generator sends the AsyncAPI document to the Parser as **asyncapiString**; the stringified version of the original AsyncAPI document.
```

> 1. Parser uses additional plugins such as the OpenAPI, RAML, or Avro schemas to validate custom schemas of message payloads defined in the AsyncAPI Document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The Parser uses additional plugins such as the OpenAPI, RAML, or Avro schemas to validate custom schemas of message payloads defined in the AsyncAPI document.
```

> 1. If the asyncAPI document is invalid, it throws an error based on the type of failure that was encountered. For example, if the AsyncAPI document is not a string nor a JS object, parser throws the `invalid-document-type` error. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. If the asyncAPI document is invalid, it throws an error based on the encountered failure type. For example, if the AsyncAPI document is not a string nor a JavaScript object, the Parser throws an `invalid-document-type` error. 
```

   Similarly, you may encounter errors such as:
      - `invalid-json`
      - `invalid-yaml`
      - `impossible-to-convert-to-json`

> 1. If the document is valid, it modifies the asyncAPI document and returns a set of helper functions and bundles them together into the **asyncapi** variable. These helper functions in the form asyncapi variable are passed to the **Template Context**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. If the document is valid, the Parser modifies the AsyncAPI document, returns a set of helper functions, and bundles them together into the **asyncapi** variable. These helper functions in the form of an **asyncapi** variable are passed to the **Template Context**.
```

Who is `it` here? The Parser?

Author: yes it is the parser

> 1. Template context passes all of these values to the [**Render engine**](react-render-engine.md) of your choice. Finally, the render engine generates whatever output you may have specified in your template such as—code, documentation, diagrams, pdf, applications etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The Template Context passes all of these values to the [**Render Engine**](react-render-engine.md) of your choice. Finally, the Render Engine generates whatever output you may have specified in your template. (i.e. code, documentation, diagrams, pdfs, applications, etc.)
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[AsyncAPI document] --> B
    B[Generator] -->|asyncapiString| C(Parser)
    C --> D{Validation}
    D -->|invalid| B
    D -->|asyncapi -> helper functions| E[Template Context]
    E --> F[Render Engine]
```

> > To learn more about parser and access all of its features, you can check out the AsyncAPI [Parser’s github repository](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> To learn more about the Parser and access all of its features, check out the AsyncAPI [Parser’s GitHub repository](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js).
```
